# Instruction on the application of the Apostolic Letter Summorum Pontificum of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI given Motu Proprio (April 30, 2011)

---
pope: Benedict XVI
title: Instruction on the application of the Apostolic Letter Summorum Pontificum of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI given Motu Proprio (April 30, 2011)
published_date: 2011-04-30
doc_type: other
source: http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/pontifical_commissions/ecclsdei/documents/rc_com_ecclsdei_doc_20110430_istr-universae-ecclesiae_en.html
---

[](</index.htm>) |   
[](<javascript:history.go\(-1\)>) [](<javascript:up\(\)>) |   
---|---|---  
|  **PONTIFICAL COMMISSION _ECCLESIA DEI_**** __ ** ** INSTRUCTION  
ON THE APPLICATION OF THE APOSTOLIC LETTER  
_SUMMORUM PONTIFICUM_  
OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVI  
GIVEN _MOTU PROPRIO_ I.  
Introduction ** 1\. The Apostolic Letter _Summorum Pontificum_ of the Sovereign Pontiff [Benedict XVI](</holy_father/benedict_xvi/index.htm>) given _Motu Proprio_ on 7 July 2007, which came into effect on 14 September 2007, has made the richness of the Roman Liturgy more accessible to the Universal Church. ** ** 2\. With this Motu Proprio, the Holy Father Pope [Benedict XVI](</holy_father/benedict_xvi/index.htm>) promulgated a universal law for the Church, intended to establish new regulations for the use of the Roman Liturgy in effect in 1962. ** ** 3\. The Holy Father, having recalled the concern of the Sovereign Pontiffs in caring for the Sacred Liturgy and in their recognition of liturgical books, reaffirms the traditional principle, recognised from time immemorial and necessary to be maintained into the future, that “ _each particular Church must be in accord with the universal Church not only regarding the doctrine of the faith and sacramental signs, but also as to the usages universally handed down by apostolic and unbroken tradition. These are to be maintained not only so that errors may be avoided, but also so that the faith may be passed on in its integrity, since the Church's rule of prayer_(lex orandi)_corresponds to her rule of belief_(lex credendi).”[1] 4\. The Holy Father recalls also those Roman Pontiffs who, in a particular way, were notable in this task, specifically Saint Gregory the Great and Saint Pius V. The Holy Father stresses moreover that, among the sacred liturgical books, the _Missale Romanum_ has enjoyed a particular prominence in history, and was kept up to date throughout the centuries until the time of [Blessed Pope John XXIII](</holy_father/john_xxiii/index.htm>). Subsequently in 1970, following the liturgical reform after the [Second Vatican Council](</archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm>), Pope Paul VI approved for the Church of the Latin rite a new Missal, which was then translated into various languages. In the year 2000, Pope John Paul II promulgated the third edition of this Missal. ** ** 5\. Many of the faithful, formed in the spirit of the liturgical forms prior to the [Second Vatican Council](</archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm>), expressed a lively desire to maintain the ancient tradition. For this reason, [Pope John Paul II](</holy_father/john_paul_ii/index.htm>) with a special Indult _Quattuor abhinc annos_ issued in 1984 by the Congregation for Divine Worship, granted the faculty under certain conditions to restore the use of the Missal promulgated by [Blessed Pope John XXIII](</holy_father/john_xxiii/index.htm>). Subsequently, Pope John Paul II, with the Motu Proprio _[Ecclesia Dei](<hf_jp-ii_motu-proprio_02071988_ecclesia-dei_en.html>)_ of 1988, exhorted the Bishops to be generous in granting such a faculty for all the faithful who requested it. Pope Benedict continues this policy with the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ regarding certain essential criteria for the _Usus Antiquior_ of the Roman Rite, which are recalled here. ** ** 6\. The Roman Missal promulgated by Pope Paul VI and the last edition prepared under [Pope John XXIII](</holy_father/john_xxiii/index.htm>), are two forms of the Roman Liturgy, defined respectively as _ordinaria_ and _extraordinaria_ : they are two usages of the one Roman Rite, one alongside the other. Both are the expression of the same _lex orandi_ of the Church. On account of its venerable and ancient use, the _forma extraordinaria_ is to be maintained with appropriate honor. ** ** 7\. The Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ was accompanied by a letter from the Holy Father to Bishops, with the same date as the Motu Proprio (7 July 2007). This letter gave further explanations regarding the appropriateness and the need for the Motu Proprio; it was a matter of overcoming a lacuna by providing new norms for the use of the Roman Liturgy of 1962. Such norms were needed particularly on account of the fact that, when the new Missal had been introduced under Pope Paul VI, it had not seemed necessary to issue guidelines regulating the use of the 1962 Liturgy. By reason of the increase in the number of those asking to be able to use the _forma extraordinaria,_ it has become necessary to provide certain norms in this area. Among the statements of the Holy Father was the following: “ _There is no contradiction between the two editions of the Roman Missal. In the history of the Liturgy growth and progress are found, but not a rupture. What was sacred for prior generations, remains sacred and great for us as well, and cannot be suddenly prohibited altogether or even judged harmful.”_[2] ** ** 8\. The Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ constitutes an important expression of the Magisterium of the Roman Pontiff and of his _munus_ of regulating and ordering the Church’s Sacred Liturgy.[3] The Motu Proprio manifests his solicitude as Vicar of Christ and Supreme Pastor of the Universal Church,[4] and has the aim of:

> a. offering to all the faithful the Roman Liturgy in the _Usus Antiquior,_ considered as a precious treasure to be preserved; b. effectively guaranteeing and ensuring the use of the _forma extraordinaria_ for all who ask for it, given that the use of the 1962 Roman Liturgy is a faculty generously granted for the good of the faithful and therefore is to be interpreted in a sense favourable to the faithful who are its principal addressees; c. promoting reconciliation at the heart of the Church.

** ** **II.  
The Responsibilities   
of the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei_** ** ** 9\. The Sovereign Pontiff has conferred upon the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei_ ordinary vicarious power for the matters within its competence, in a particular way for monitoring the observance and application of the provisions of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ (cf. art. 12). ** ** 10\. § 1. The Pontifical Commission exercises this power, beyond the faculties previously granted by [Pope John Paul II](</holy_father/john_paul_ii/index.htm>) and confirmed by [Pope Benedict XVI](</holy_father/benedict_xvi/index.htm>) (cf. Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , artt. 11-12), also by means of the power to decide upon recourses legitimately sent to it, as hierarchical Superior, against any possible singular administrative provision of an Ordinary which appears to be contrary to the Motu Proprio. § 2. The decrees by which the Pontifical Commission decides recourses may be challenged _ad normam iuris_ before the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura. ** ** 11\. After having received the approval from the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei_ will have the task of looking after future editions of liturgical texts pertaining to the _forma extraordinaria_ of the Roman Rite.  ** ** **III.  
Specific Norms** ** ** 12\. Following upon the inquiry made among the Bishops of the world, and with the desire to guarantee the proper interpretation and the correct application of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum,_ this Pontifical Commission, by virtue of the authority granted to it and the faculties which it enjoys, issues this Instruction according to can. 34 of the _Code of Canon Law_. ** ** _The Competence of Diocesan Bishops_ ** ** 13\. Diocesan Bishops, according to Canon Law, are to monitor liturgical matters in order to guarantee the common good and to ensure that everything is proceeding in peace and serenity in their Dioceses[5], always in agreement with the _mens_ of the Holy Father clearly expressed by the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_.[6] In cases of controversy or well-founded doubt about the celebration in the _forma extraordinaria_ , the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei_ will adjudicate. ** ** 14\. It is the task of the Diocesan Bishop to undertake all necessary measures to ensure respect for the _forma extraordinaria_ of the Roman Rite, according to the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_. ** ** _The _coetus fidelium__(cf. Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum,_ art. 5 § 1) ** ** 15\. A _coetus fidelium_ (“group of the faithful”) can be said to be _stabiliter existens_(“existing in a stable manner”), according to the sense of art. 5 § 1 of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ ,__ when it is constituted by some people of an individual parish who, even after the publication of the Motu Proprio, come together by reason of their veneration for the Liturgy in the _Usus Antiquior,_ and who ask that it might be celebrated in the parish church or in an oratory or chapel; such a _coetus_ (“group”) can also be composed of persons coming from different parishes or dioceses, who gather together in a specific parish church or in an oratory or chapel for this purpose.  ** ** 16\. In the case of a priest who presents himself occasionally in a parish church or an oratory with some faithful, and wishes to celebrate in the _forma extraordinaria_ , as foreseen by articles 2 and 4 of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , the pastor or rector of the church, or the priest responsible, is to permit such a celebration, while respecting the schedule of liturgical celebrations in that same church. ** ** 17\. § 1. In deciding individual cases, the pastor or the rector, or the priest responsible for a church, is to be guided by his own prudence, motivated by pastoral zeal and a spirit of generous welcome. § 2. In cases of groups which are quite small, they may approach the Ordinary of the place to identify a church in which these faithful may be able to come together for such celebrations, in order to ensure easier participation and a more worthy celebration of the Holy Mass. ** ** 18\. Even in sanctuaries and places of pilgrimage the possibility to celebrate in the _forma extraordinaria_ is to be offered to groups of pilgrims who request it (cf. Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , art. 5 § 3), if there is a qualified priest. 19\. The faithful who ask for the celebration of the _forma extraordinaria_ must not in any way support or belong to groups which show themselves to be against the validity or legitimacy of the Holy Mass or the Sacraments celebrated in the _forma ordinaria_ or against the Roman Pontiff as Supreme Pastor of the Universal Church. **** __Sacerdos idoneus__ _(“Qualified Priest”)_(cf. Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , art 5 § 4) ** ** 20\. With respect to the question of the necessary requirements for a priest to be held _idoneus_ (“qualified”) to celebrate in the _forma extraordinaria_ , the following is hereby stated: 

> a. Every Catholic priest who is not impeded by Canon Law[7] is to be considered _idoneus_ (“qualified”) for the celebration of the Holy Mass in the _forma extraordinaria_. b. Regarding the use of the Latin language, a basic knowledge is necessary, allowing the priest to pronounce the words correctly and understand their meaning. c. Regarding knowledge of the execution of the Rite, priests are presumed to be qualified who present themselves spontaneously to celebrate the _forma extraordinaria_ , and have celebrated it previously.

** ** 21\. Ordinaries are asked to offer their clergy the possibility of acquiring adequate preparation for celebrations in the _forma extraordinaria._ This applies also to Seminaries, where future priests should be given proper formation, including study of Latin[8] and, where pastoral needs suggest it, the opportunity to learn the _forma extraordinaria_ of the Roman Rite.  ** ** 22\. In Dioceses without qualified priests, Diocesan Bishops can request assistance from priests of the Institutes erected by the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei,_ either to the celebrate the _forma extraordinaria_ or to teach others how to celebrate it.  ** ** 23\. The faculty to celebrate _sine populo_ (or with the participation of only one minister) in the _forma extraordinaria_ of the Roman Rite is given by the Motu Proprio to all priests, whether secular or religious (cf. Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , art. 2). For such celebrations therefore, priests, by provision of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum,_ do not require any special permission from their Ordinaries or superiors. _Liturgical and Ecclesiastical Discipline_ ** ** 24\. The liturgical books of the _forma extraordinaria_ are to be used as they are. All those who wish to celebrate according to the _forma extraordinaria_ of the Roman Rite must know the pertinent rubrics and are obliged to follow them correctly. ** ** 25\. New saints and certain of the new prefaces can and ought to be inserted into the 1962 Missal[9], according to provisions which will be indicated subsequently.  ** ** 26\. As foreseen by article 6 of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ , the readings of the Holy Mass of the Missal of 1962 can be proclaimed either solely in the Latin language, or in Latin followed by the vernacular or, in Low Masses, solely in the vernacular. ** ** 27\. With regard to the disciplinary norms connected to celebration, the ecclesiastical discipline contained in the Code of Canon Law of 1983 applies. ** ** 28\. Furthermore, by virtue of its character of special law, within its own area, the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ derogates from those provisions of law, connected with the sacred Rites, promulgated from 1962 onwards and incompatible with the rubrics of the liturgical books in effect in 1962. _Confirmation and Holy Orders_ ** ** 29\. Permission to use the older formula for the rite of Confirmation was confirmed by the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ (cf. art. 9 § 2). Therefore, in the _forma extraordinaria_ , it is not necessary to use the newer formula of Pope Paul VI as found in the _Ordo Confirmationis_. ** ** 30\. As regards tonsure, minor orders and the subdiaconate, the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ does not introduce any change in the discipline of the _Code of Canon Law_ of 1983; consequently, in Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life which are under the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei_ , one who has made solemn profession or who has been definitively incorporated into a clerical institute of apostolic life, becomes incardinated as a cleric in the institute or society upon ordination to the diaconate, in accordance with canon 266 § 2 of the _Code of Canon Law_. ** ** 31\. Only in Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life which are under the Pontifical Commission _Ecclesia Dei,_ and in those which use the liturgical books of the _forma extraordinaria_ ,__ is the use of the _Pontificale Romanum_ of 1962 for the conferral of minor and major orders permitted. **** __Breviarium Romanum__ ** ** 32\. Art. 9 § 3 of the Motu Proprio _Summorum Pontificum_ gives clerics the faculty to use the _Breviarium Romanum_ in effect in 1962, which is to be prayed entirely and in the Latin language. ** ** _The Sacred Triduum_ ** ** 33\. If there is a qualified priest, a _coetus fidelium_ (“group of faithful”), which follows the older liturgical tradition, can also celebrate the Sacred _Triduum_ in the _forma extraordinaria._ When there is no church or oratory designated exclusively for such celebrations, the parish priest or Ordinary, in agreement with the qualified priest, should find some arrangement favourable to the good of souls, not excluding the possibility of a repetition of the celebration of the Sacred Triduum in the same church. ** ** _The Rites of Religious Orders_ ** ** 34\. The use of the liturgical books proper to the Religious Orders which were in effect in 1962 is permitted. ** ** __Pontificale Romanum__ _and the _Rituale Romanum__ ** ** 35\. The use of the _Pontificale Romanum_ , the _Rituale Romanum_ , as well as the _Caeremoniale Episcoporum_ in effect in 1962, is permitted, in keeping with n. 28 of this Instruction, and always respecting n. 31 of the same Instruction. ** ** _The Holy Father Pope Benedict XVI, in an audience granted to the undersigned Cardinal President of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei on 8 April 2011, approved this present Instruction and ordered its publication._ ** ** Given at Rome, at the Offices of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei, 30 April, 2011, on the memorial of Pope Saint Pius V. ** ** **William Cardinal LEVADA** _  
President_** ** **Mons. Guido Pozzo** _  
Secretary_   


* * *

[1] BENEDICTUS XVI, _Litterae Apostolicae Summorum Pontificum motu proprio datae_ , I, _AAS_ 99 (2007) 777; cf. _Institutio Generalis Missalis Romani_ , tertia editio 2002, n. 397. [2] BENEDICTUS XVI, _Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis_ , _AAS_ 99 (2007) 798. [3] Cf. _Code of Canon Law_ , Canon 838 §1 and §2.  [4] Cf. _Code of Canon Law,_ Canon 331. [5] Cf. _Code of Canon Law,_ Canons 223 § 2 or 838 §1 and §4. [6] BENEDICTUS XVI, _Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis_ , _AAS_ 99 (2007) 799. [7] Cf. _Code of Canon Law,_ Canon 900 § 2. [8] Cf. _Code of Canon Law,_ Canon 249; Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Constitution _Sacrosanctum Concilium_ , 36; Declaration _Optatum totius_ , 13. [9] BENEDICTUS XVI, _Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis_ , _AAS_ 99 (2007) 797.  
---|---